

 
variability detection and classification in astronomical datasets on the example of TESS
 

outline:

Nowadays large-scale astronomical surveys enable us to see the universe in a much more detailed, and in particular different way than before.
In the era of such large-scale surveys, methods to handle investigate these  data, and especially to classify sources, become more and more important.
This project uses light curve data from the NASA Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
(TESS), where each star is observed for 27 days with a high cadence of 30 minutes.
The project entails the development and testing of reliable and fast machine-learning methods in order to identify and classify rare types of variable stars and
exoplanet systems in the Milky Way. 


background:

Most stars, like the sun, have approximately constant brightness, but approximately 1 - 5 % of all stars show a significant amount of variability in their intensity.
Variable stars are important tracers of the Milky Way's evolution.
Stars such as RR Lyrae allow to precisely estimate distances in the old Milky
Way components, providing important information to answer questions regarding
formation and evolution of galaxies. Other stars such as spotted stars allow to
gain insight into magnetic activity of stars. Rare supernova events allow to
calculate distances at cosmological scales. Historically, variable stars have
been identified by manually sorting images or making brightness-over-time (light
curve) plots based on small, targeted surveys. Modern all-sky astronomical
surveys allow for evaluating huge amounts of data. Machine-learning tools are
extremely important to cope with such an amount of data, as well as to allow for
a more precise evaluation of the data than done with classical algorithms.
Approaches like that were already carried out and proven as very successful for some
astronomical surveys such as Pan-STARRS1, which provided relatively sparse data. This research project aims to test the
effectivity of using machine learning to classifying variable stars for TESS, whose
data quality should allow for a very detailed classification.


learning objectives:

Programming and software testing (Python), algorithm design, more knowledge regarding
processing astronomical data, in particular data of variable stars.
Programming language: Python 3.x. Preknowledge in programming is helpful, but this project can also be tailored towards students with no programming background. 
(In the past, for similar projects I supervised students with limited to no programming experience, as well as students with a lot of experience in programming/ software engineering. )
language: I'm fluent in English; I'm learning Spanish but I'm not advanced enough to supervise students speaking only Spanish.

Supervisor:
Nina Hernitschek, PhD; currently a senior postdoc in astronomy and data science at Vanderbilt University and visiting professor at Universidad de Antofagasta (Chile);
assistant professor in astroinformatics at Universidad de Antofagasta from 2023 on


